.TH FILEHASH 1 "September 2025" "filehash 1.0.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
filehash \- calculate hash values for files
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B filehash
[\fIOPTIONS\fR] \fIFILE\fR...
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B filehash
is a command-line tool for calculating hash values of files using various algorithms.
It supports MD5, SHA1, and SHA256 hash algorithms and can process single or multiple files.
.PP
The program is designed to be simple, efficient, and reliable for verifying file integrity
and generating checksums for files.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-m ", " \-\-md5
Calculate MD5 hash (default algorithm)
.TP
.BR \-s ", " \-\-sha1
Calculate SHA1 hash
.TP
.BR \-S ", " \-\-sha256
Calculate SHA256 hash
.TP
.BR \-a ", " \-\-all
Calculate all supported hash types (MD5, SHA1, SHA256)
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Display help message and exit
.TP
.BR \-v ", " \-\-version
Display version information and exit
.SH EXAMPLES
Calculate MD5 hash for a single file:
.RS
.B filehash file.txt
.RE
.PP
Calculate SHA1 hash:
.RS
.B filehash \-s file.txt
.RE
.PP
Calculate SHA256 hash:
.RS
.B filehash \-S file.txt
.RE
.PP
Calculate all hash types:
.RS
.B filehash \-a file.txt
.RE
.PP
Process multiple files:
.RS
.B filehash file1.txt file2.txt file3.txt
.RE
.PP
Use wildcards to process multiple files:
.RS
.B filehash *.txt
.RE
.SH OUTPUT FORMAT
The output format follows the pattern:
.PP
.RS
ALGORITHM (hash_value) = filename
.RE
.PP
For example:
.RS
MD5 (d41d8cd98f00b204e9800998ecf8427e) = empty.txt
.br
SHA1 (da39a3ee5e6b4b0d3255bfef95601890afd80709) = empty.txt
.br
SHA256 (e3b0c44298fc1c149afbf4c8996fb92427ae41e4649b934ca495991b7852b855) = empty.txt
.RE
.SH EXIT STATUS
The program returns the following exit codes:
.TP
.B 0
Success - all files processed successfully
.TP
.B 1
Error - invalid arguments, file access errors, or other failures
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /usr/bin/filehash
The executable program
.TP
.I /usr/share/man/man1/filehash.1
This manual page
.SH ALGORITHMS
.TP
.B MD5
Message Digest Algorithm 5, produces 128-bit hash values. While widely used,
MD5 is considered cryptographically broken and should not be used for security purposes.
.TP
.B SHA1
Secure Hash Algorithm 1, produces 160-bit hash values. SHA1 is deprecated
for cryptographic use but still commonly used for file integrity checking.
.TP
.B SHA256
Secure Hash Algorithm 256, produces 256-bit hash values. Part of the SHA-2
family and currently considered secure for most applications.
.SH SECURITY CONSIDERATIONS
While this tool can calculate cryptographic hashes, users should be aware of
the security implications of different algorithms:
.IP \(bu 2
MD5 and SHA1 are vulnerable to collision attacks and should not be used
for security-critical applications.
.IP \(bu 2
SHA256 is currently considered secure and is recommended for new applications.
.IP \(bu 2
For digital signatures or other security applications, consider using
dedicated cryptographic tools.
.SH BUGS
Report bugs to: https://github.com/caojiying002/filehash-tool/issues
.SH AUTHOR
Written by Cao Jiying.
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright \(co 2024 Cao Jiying.
.br
License GPLv3+: GNU GPL version 3 or later <https://gnu.org/licenses/gpl.html>.
.br
This is free software: you are free to change and redistribute it.
.br
There is NO WARRANTY, to the extent permitted by law.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR md5sum (1),
.BR sha1sum (1),
.BR sha256sum (1),
.BR openssl (1)